Initial draft of updated sidenav guidance (#4501)
department-of-veterans-affairs/vets-design-system-documentation: src/_components/sidenav.md

---

<va-alert status="info">
 <h2 slot="headline">Component in Iterative Development</h2>
  <p>This component is currently being designed, developed, and released in phases. It is intended to eventually replace several existing side navigation implementations across VA.gov, which vary in features and functionality. The process of establishing consistent site-wide requirements and functionality agreements is currently in progress.</p>
</va-alert>

## Examples

### Web

#### Default

{% include storybook-preview.html story="components-va-sidenav--default" link_text="va-sidenav Default" %}

#### Levels
{% include storybook-preview.html story="components-va-sidenav--levels" link_text="va-sidenav Levels" %}

#### Categorized Links
{% include storybook-preview.html story="components-va-sidenav--categorized-links" link_text="va-sidenav Categorized Links" %}

#### Nested Links
{% include storybook-preview.html story="components-va-sidenav--nested-links" link_text="va-sidenav Nested Links" %}

## Usage

### When to use side navigation

* To display a navigational hierarchy with one to three levels of depth.
* To display the "sub-navigation" within a specific section of a website.

> * To present a curated group of related pages or resources in a non-hierarchical manner.

Author: I tweaked content to be more specific. Let me know if that doesn't help. Thanks!

intro-text: "Vertical navigation to place at the side of a page."
status: use-with-caution-candidate
figma-link: https://www.figma.com/design/afurtw4iqQe6y4gXfNfkkk/VADS-Component-Library?m=auto&node-id=34159-3535&t=w2lNwVQNDrEuZwT0-1
anchors:
  - anchor: Examples
  - anchor: Usage
  - anchor: Behavior
  - anchor: Code usage
  - anchor: Not a Card
  - anchor: Content considerations
  - anchor: Accessibility considerations
  - anchor: Related
  - anchor: Component checklist  
---

<va-alert status="info">
  <h2 slot="headline">Enhancements Planned, Feedback Welcome</h2>
  <p>This component is available for use and will continue to evolve with additional features and functionality. It is planned to replace several existing side navigation implementations across VA.gov to promote consistency and improve usability.</p>
  <p>If you'd like you participate in future iterations, <a href="https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/vets-design-system-documentation/discussions/4252">join the discussion</a>!</p>
</va-alert>

## Examples

### Web

#### Default

{% include storybook-preview.html story="components-va-sidenav--default" link_text="va-sidenav Default" %}

#### Levels

> {% include storybook-preview.html story="components-va-sidenav--levels" link_text="va-sidenav Levels" %}

Reviewer: @amyleadem We intentionally added a "Levels" story to Storybook because there was some terminology confusion between ourselves about what a level was (it starts at the header) and I think we assumed it might also be confusing to external teams which I think is probably why it was added to the guidelines too; more as info rather than a useful variation. 

<img width="316" height="459" alt="Screenshot 2025-07-21 at 1 25 33 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f1b2d555-c453-4ffd-8f09-770d4889c7d1" />

* To show sub-navigation within a specific section of a site.
* To present a curated group of closely related pages or resources within a section.

### When to consider something else

* For small sections with fewer than five pages, where a full navigation structure may be unnecessary.
* For navigating within a single, long page. Use an [On this page]({{ site.baseurl }}/components/on-this-page) component instead.
* When linking to content that isn't closely related.
* Only one Side Navigation component should be used per page. If more are needed, consider alternative navigation solutions.

### How this component works

Side Navigation provides secondary navigation within a specific section of a website. It helps users understand the scope of the current topic and move between closely related pages. This is distinct from the site-wide [Header]({{ site.baseurl }}/components/header) navigation, which covers the entire site, and the [On this page]({{ site.baseurl }}/components/on-this-page) component, which navigates within a single page.

The component is designed to reflect a user's task-oriented goals, rather than the internal structure of the VA. 

> There are two primary ways to structure side navigation item that contains child pages:

Reviewer 2: This sentence is awkward. "side navigation items"?

* **Categorized Links**: A top-level item can serve as a non-clickable heading for a group of child pages. This pattern is useful for organizing links into thematic categories, similar to the "spokes" on a VA.gov benefit hub page, where a title like "Manage benefits" introduces a list of related tasks.

* **Nested Links**: A parent item can be a standard link that navigates to a landing page for that section, while also containing a nested list of links to child pages. This is a common pattern for hierarchical site structures.

## Behavior

At mobile breakpoints, the navigation menu is hidden by default to save space. A trigger button, typically labeled "Related pages menu", reveals the navigation menu similarly to an [Accordion]({{site.baseurl}}/components/accordion) when activated.

### Placement

> The Side Navigation component should always appear in a consistent space throughout all of VA.gov whenever it is used.

Reviewer 2: Oh I see, it's by viewport.

> The Side Navigation component should always appear in a consistent space throughout all of VA.gov whenever it is used.

Author: Added a little more clarity here.
```
The Side Navigation component should appear in a consistent location across desktop views and a consistent (but distinct) location across mobile views.
```

> The Side Navigation component should always appear in a consistent space throughout all of VA.gov whenever it is used.

Reviewer 3: Resolving this comment since I'd like to pursue this as a follow-on topic. It does not need to be addressed in this PR.

> The Side Navigation component should appear in a consistent location across desktop views and a consistent (but distinct) location across mobile views.

Reviewer 3: I always lean towards being explicit, but I think we can leave it alone for now.

`va-sidenav` **(Parent Component)**: This is the main container that wraps all the navigation elements. It can include an optional header with a title and an optional icon.

`va-sidenav-item` **(Internal Child Component)**: This is the basic building block for a single, clickable navigation link. It includes properties for the link's destination (`href`) and label. It can also be flagged as the `current-page` for distinct styling.

`va-sidenav-submenu` **(Internal Child Component)**: This component acts as a container for nesting `va-sidenav-items`, allowing for the creation of a hierarchical structure (child and grandchild links). The parent item of a submenu can optionally be a link itself.

This compositional structure allows developers to build complex navigation menus by slotting together the necessary child components. For single-page applications, the component supports router integration by firing a vaRouteChange event, which prevents native link routing and allows a routing library like React Router to handle the navigation.

## Content considerations

* Keep links in the side navigation short. They can be shorter derivatives of page titles themselves.

> * If the navigation hierarchy is too long, users may miss items at the bottom. If it’s too deep, users may miss items that require too many clicks. Usability test to find the right balance between breadth and depth.

Reviewer 3: **suggestion (non-blocking):** Recommend including a top-level summary here. [USWDS](https://designsystem.digital.gov/components/side-navigation/) uses "Always test your navigation.", but I am not sure if that is a possible recommendation here.

```suggestion
* **Consider the impact of displaying long or complex link lists.** If the navigation hierarchy is too long, users may miss items at the bottom. If it’s too deep, users may miss items that require too many clicks. Test with real users to find the right balance between breadth and depth.
```

> ## Accessibility considerations

Reviewer 2: Given that we're not claiming this is a USWDS component, should we be borrowing from the a11y considerations? Do we plan to have similar test coverage? There are a lot of potentially valuable tests called out here: https://designsystem.digital.gov/components/side-navigation/accessibility-tests/

Author: ☝️ @amyleadem @jeana-adhoc Curious to hear your thoughts here, in case you'd like to add or link to any related tests. 🙏

---
layout: component
title: Side Navigation
github-title: va-sidenav

> intro-text: "Vertical navigation to place at the side of a page."

Reviewer 3: **quibble (non-blocking):** Flagging that this description isn't _always_ true since it can sometimes be at the top of the content (in mobile and high-zoom) and it isn't on the side of anything in other assistive technologies like screen readers. That said, I recognize that the component is called "side navigation", so it comes loaded already. Just flagging that it might be worth revisiting in the future so that we are generally less desktop/visually oriented in our descriptions.

status: use-with-caution-candidate
figma-link: https://www.figma.com/design/afurtw4iqQe6y4gXfNfkkk/VADS-Component-Library?m=auto&node-id=34159-3535&t=w2lNwVQNDrEuZwT0-1
web-component: va-sidenav
anchors:
  - anchor: Examples
  - anchor: Usage
  - anchor: Behavior
  - anchor: Code considerations
  - anchor: Code usage
  - anchor: Not a Card
  - anchor: Content considerations
  - anchor: Accessibility considerations
  - anchor: Related

>   - anchor: Component checklist  

Reviewer 3: *issue:** The "Component checklist" link in "on this page" does not go anywhere

Reviewer 2: Add the include at the bottom AND a yaml file for the component. The header is in the include.

---

<va-alert status="info">
  <h2 slot="headline">Enhancements Planned, Feedback Welcome</h2>

>   <p>This component is available for use and will continue to evolve with additional features and functionality. It is planned to replace several existing side navigation implementations across VA.gov to promote consistency and improve usability.</p>

Reviewer 3: **issue:** "Side navigation" has inconsistent capitalization throughout the page. Sometimes it is capitalized as "Side Navigation" and sometimes it is lower case. I am not sure of the established pattern for component names, but we should make them consistent.

Reviewer 2: I have Keegan writing up the rules for us. For now, let's go with "Side Navigation" to refer to the component.

  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/images/components/side-navigation/side-navigation-mobile-open.png" alt="Paperless Delivery with an expanded side navigation in a mobile view" class="site-component-example__image" style="max-width:256px">
  <figcaption class="site-component-example__caption">Mobile views: Side navigation collapsed and expanded in the Paperless Delivery example.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Code considerations

Side Navigation is built as a flexible component using a compositional architecture. This means the final navigation menu is constructed by combining several smaller, internal child components within a parent container. This modular approach simplifies maintenance, improves future expandability, and allows for easy integration into different environments.

The component is composed of the following parts:

`va-sidenav` **(Parent Component)**: This is the main container that wraps all the navigation elements. It can include an optional header with a title and an optional icon.

> `va-sidenav-item` **(Internal Child Component)**: This is the basic building block for a single, clickable navigation link. It includes properties for the link's destination (`href`) and label. It can also be flagged as the `current-page` for distinct styling.

Reviewer 3: Ah gotcha. Thanks for that - I was able to find the va-sidenav-item prop in the [Storybook docs](https://design.va.gov/storybook/?path=/docs/components-va-sidenav--docs) after all. Resolving this comment and homer-ing into the bushes. 

<img width="1405" height="294" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b85cdaf1-f690-4625-a94f-8e0dc8ebc9fd" />

`va-sidenav-submenu` **(Internal Child Component)**: This component acts as a container for nesting `va-sidenav-items`, allowing for the creation of a hierarchical structure (child and grandchild links). The parent item of a submenu can optionally be a link itself.

This compositional structure allows developers to build complex navigation menus by slotting together the necessary child components. For single-page applications, the component supports router integration by firing a vaRouteChange event, which prevents native link routing and allows a routing library like React Router to handle the navigation.

> {% include component-docs.html component_name=page.web-component %}

Reviewer 3: **issue:** It looks like the markdown inside the table is not getting processed. The link text isn't linking and the backticks are not generating code styling. For example, "[VADS color token](https://design.va.gov/foundation/color-palette)."

Reviewer 3: Following up: It looks like adding [markdownify filter](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/liquid/filters/) to at least [line 25 of the component-docs.html include](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/vets-design-system-documentation/blob/main/src/_includes/component-docs.html#L25) should fix this particular issue. (we probably want to add it to the other `event.docs` and `doc.text` references later in the file, but that would require additional testing. Adding it to line 25 should be all we need for this PR). 
<img width="1420" height="803" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/9b1d85b2-5cd9-4774-8311-bbda2b890483" />

## Content considerations

* **Link text should be concise and descriptive.** Link text should be scannable and clearly convey the purpose of the page. It does not always need to match the related page's title. 
* **Consider the impact of displaying long or complex link lists.** If the navigation hierarchy is too long, users may miss items at the bottom. If it’s too deep, users may miss items that require too many clicks. Test with real users to find the right balance between breadth and depth.

## Accessibility considerations

> * Ensure the side navigational system is keyboard accessible. Users should be able to tab through each link.

Reviewer 3: **suggestion:** I think we can remove this piece of guidance since it is covered by the tests in the USWDS link, and I'd rather show all or none of the a11y considerations (unless they are VADS specific)
```suggestion
```
